
    Computer Science 3675
    Section 001
    Fall 2016
    Programming Assignment 8

*Assigned:* 	Wednesday, November 9
*Due:* 	Monday, December 5, 11:59pm


      Purpose of this assignment
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------

This assignment has you use inheritance and virtual methods to similate
a type with variants.


      The assignment
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------

This assignment has you redo the derivative computing program in Java.

Your first derivative program uses a type with several constructors to
represent expressions. Java is an object-oriented programming language,
and object-oriented programming has a different way of managing types
with several flavors. You create an abstract class Expression that
stands for an arbitrary kind of expression, and a subclass of Expression
for each kind of expression.

This has the advantage that new kinds of expressions can be added just
by adding new subclasses. It is not necessary to modify any existing
code; you just add new code. Removing a kind of expression is just a
matter of removing a subclass. If you imagine providing expressions and
derivative computations in a library (which most programmers are not
allowed to modify) you can see how useful this approach is. Programmers
can add their own kinds of expressions without the need to modify the
library.

A starting point
<http://www.cs.ecu.edu/karl/3675/fall16/Assn/Assn8/Derivatives.java> is
provided for you. Extend this to handle the subtraction, multiplication
and constant powers, as you did for assignment 3. A tester
<http://www.cs.ecu.edu/karl/3675/fall16/Assn/Assn8/TestDeriv.java> is
also available. Try compiling and running the starting point files
before trying to modify them.


      Submitting your solution
      ------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hand in your program using the submit utility, as assignment 8. Turn in
both your tester and your file containing the expression classes. Please
continue to call them Derivatives.java and TestDeriv.java to make
testing easy for me. So use command

  ~abrahamsonk/3675/bin/submit 8 Derivatives.java TestDeriv.java

to submit your files.

 

 

 

